---
layout: post
title:  "Jekyll - Static Site Generator"
date:   2024-08-14 15:34:43 -0400
category: "jekyll"
---


Jekyll is a beginner-friendly, static site generator that transforms plain text files into a complete website. It’s perfect for creating blogs, as it automatically organizes posts, generates pages, and supports code snippets. Jekyll is great for developers who want the flexibility to customize their site, but it’s also easy for beginners—just pick a cool theme and start typing your blogs in a markup language like Markdown. Jekyll handles the rest, making it a simple yet powerful tool for building and maintaining a website.

### Basic commands

To create a new site run:

```bash
    jekyll new <PROJNAME> --options
```
Running the above command will generate the following file structure:

```
my-jekyll-site/
├── 404.html 
├── Gemfile 
├── _config.yml 
├── _posts/
│   └── 2024-08-14-welcome-to-jekyll.markdown
├── about.markdown
└── contact.markdown
```

To serve the site locally, run:
```bash
   bundle exec jekyll serve 
```



### Files and folders:
- `<PROJNAME>` = Your project folder.
- `_posts/` = The folder where your blog posts are stored.
- `_site/` = Contains static files generated by Jekyll. You can deploy this folder to a web server. Do not modify this folder directly
- `_config.yml` = Configuration file for your Jekyll site. It contains settings and attributes for your site.
- `Gemfile` = Ruby file used to manage the site's dependencies, including plugins and other gems.
- `about.md` = Example of a static page, such as an "About" page, which you can edit.
- `index.md` = The home page of your site, which you can edit.

### Front matter
The front matter of a file is a block of YAML or JSON that consists of key-value pairs defining metadata and settings for the page or post.
For example, if you were to open the file `<PROJNAME>/_posts/2024-08-24-jekyll.markdown`, you may see this:

```
    ---
    layout: post
    title: "Jekyll Basics"
    date: 2024-08-24 15:58:59 -700
    categories: jekyll update
    ---
```
Here's what each key does:
  - `layout`: Specifies which layout file to use when rendering the page or post. In this case, `post` will use the `post.html` layout, defined in the `_layouts` directory. You can customize this by creating your own layouts in the `_layouts` directory.

```
my-jekyll-site/
├── _layouts/
│   ├── default.html
│   ├── post.html
│   └── page.html
├── ...
```

  - `title`: Defines the title of the page or post. This is typically displayed at the top of the page or post.
  - `date`: Sets the date and time of the page or post. This can be used for sorting and displaying posts chronologically. It usually affects the URL structure and can be used for generating timestamps. 
  - `categories`: Tags the page or post with one or more categories. Categories help organize and group content. They can be specified as a list and are typically used to filter and display content on category-specific pages.

You can set custom variables. I'll get into that later. Every page must have front matter.

### Writing Posts
Blogs posts are in the `_posts/` folder and are in the format `YYYY-MM-DD-<POST-TITLE>`. To create a new post, you just need to create a new file in the `_posts` with the proper naming. Posts can be written in markdown or html.
